I started to study the Bible in 1993.
At that time, I was 43 years old.
I was married for 19 years,
and I had two children.
At that time, I didn’t know if I would become
one of Jehovah’s Witnesses or not.
But I accepted a Bible study.
At my husband’s request, I started
studying the Bible at the same time,
but I only studied for about a year.
Then I decided, ‘I’m going to stop.’
I asked him to stop studying too.
I told him: “Let’s stop studying.
“This is not for us.
We don’t understand it.”
But in a very diplomatic and calm way,
he said he would continue.
When I realized
he would continue studying, I said to myself:
‘Well, all right then.
‘Just you wait and see.
‘If you really want to continue,
I will somehow make you stop studying
(in a subtle way), but I will do it.’
Just seeing him get ready to go
in field service annoyed me so much.
I started burying him with household chores,
asking him to help me
more and more around the house.
But calmly and gently every time,
he would ask me
if he could prepare for meetings.
And one time when he asked me
if he could prepare for the meeting,
yet again I got irritated and said:
“You’re not going to prepare now.
We’re going to clean
the whole apartment thoroughly.”
After we were finally finished at midnight,
he asked me very calmly
if there was anything else
he could help me with.
It was not easy for him
to deal with my efforts
to force him to stop studying.
And after he got baptized,
I tried even harder.
But he never retaliated;
he stayed calm and endured it.
In this period, I was trying
to understand her reactions.
But it wasn’t easy for me.
Hearing her criticisms, those harsh replies,
I thought sometimes:
‘I think I’ll just give up.
It makes no sense to go on like this.’
I said to the brother who was studying
with me about this,
“I want to stop.”
And he encouraged me.
He said: “No, no, no, don’t stop.
“Don’t quit.
“Continue, continue.
Probably your wife will follow you.”
These conversations always encouraged me,
and when we finished our study,
I would see things
from a different perspective.
I always loved my wife,
and I wanted her to be by my side.
During this period, he often told me
how much he loved me
—many times, yes, very often.
And sometimes he would ask me
if I loved him too.
There were times when I would answer him,
and there were times
when I just smiled and said nothing.
And I even thought, ‘Hey, this guy
really cares about me.’
I was impressed by his kindness.
I was very impressed.
Many times, I was musing:
‘Well, as a man, he could hit me.
He could be demanding,
“You will sit down,”’ you know.
But no, he never did that.
He never raised his voice,
never spoke a mean word
—never.
When she saw that I did not retaliate
—as in I would not reply harshly
and I would not talk badly to her—
then eventually
she would calm down.
In his calm and mild way,
he began inviting me to the meetings.
He kept on inviting me,
and sometimes I was willing to accept.
Slowly, I started to attend the meetings.
I was happy.
I was very happy when she said
she wanted to resume her study.
In August 2006,
I started studying the Bible again.
And in March 2007,
I became an unbaptized publisher.
And in July 2007, I decided to get baptized.
I served in the Baptism Department,
and I had the privilege
to personally baptize my dear wife.
First Corinthians 13:4 says
that “love is patient and kind.”
Patience means,
first of all, being patient for months,
years, or maybe even decades.
Never give up.
Never consider someone as a lost cause.